GWEN IFILL: As the Supreme Court
considers
yet another major affirmative
action case,
tonight's Race Matters
conversation focuses
on what happens before students
get to college
when they grow up in mostly
segregated inner-city
schools.
"PBS NewsHour" special
correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault is reporting a
year-long series
on solutions to the questions
raised by race.
Tonight, she talks with Pedro
Noguera, a professor
at the University of California,
Los Angeles,
who has found what can work.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Despite
an historic
Supreme Court ruling some 61
years ago outlawing
segregated schools, today, huge
numbers of
students remain in separate and
unequal schools,
most in inner cities.
But it doesn't have to be that
way, says Pedro
Noguera, director of the Center
for Study
of School Transformation at
UCLA. I met him
in New York, where he was about
to speak with
a group of educators.
Professor Noguera, thank you so
much for joining
us.
Sixty-one years after separate
and unequal
was ruled illegal, you say it's
still happening.
Why?
PEDRO NOGUERA, University of
California, Los
Angeles: Well, it's happening
because the
courts have basically made it
very difficult
to continue to pursue
integration.
And that's after we made quite a
bit of progress
in this country, especially in
the South,
but now we know that schools in
the North
and the West are more segregated
now than
they were 30 years ago. So, we
now find ourselves
in a situation where not only
are schools
increasingly racially separate,
but we're
also concentrating the poorest
children in
schools that have the fewest
resources.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Why?
PEDRO NOGUERA: I would say it's
a combination
of lack of investment in schools
that serve
poor children and the fact that
we have no
longer the political will.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But you
have argued
that separate schools play a
role in perpetuating
inequality, not just in the
schools, but in
general.
PEDRO NOGUERA: They do.
They do, because separate has
still been unequal
in education. The racially
separate schools,
even when the schools do a good
job, the learning
opportunities you have a child
will influence
the kind of college you go into,
the kind
of profession you have access
to, the kind
of income you earn.
And so if we really are
interested in creating
a society that's more equal and
less characterized
by racial divisions, then we
need to put more
investment in education and
leveling the playing
field and integrating our
schools.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: There
have been schools
that have started that are
supposed to be
making up for these disparities,
like the
charter schools and magnet
schools.
What impact are those kinds of
schools having,
though, on public education?
PEDRO NOGUERA: Well, in fact,
many of the
charter schools are even more
segregated than
the public schools.
Middle-class families,
particularly middle-class
African-American families, want
integrated
schools for their kids.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Not long
ago, Professor
Raj Chetty told me about an
experiment that
took young people out of
segregated communities
into more integrated
communities. But even
he said that, while those were
successful,
you needed to fix those within
the community.
Now, you have some solutions and
some examples
where that works.
PEDRO NOGUERA: Yes, and --
because we do have
examples.
Tulsa, Oklahoma, for example,
here, you have
a city, a very red state, the
best high school
in the city, Booker T.
Washington, is 50 percent
black, and it is a school that
the entire
city looks up to. That should be
a model for
the country.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But why
is it a school
that everybody looks up to?
PEDRO NOGUERA: Because of the
quality of education
provided.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: You just
said that
there wasn't the will in these
communities.
So what happens in that case?
PEDRO NOGUERA: Well, Tulsa --
it's interesting,
because Tulsa has a very ugly
history. In
1924, there was the race riots
there, where
the black community was burned
to the ground,
Greenwood.
And there has been an effort,
though, in Tulsa
to invest in early childhood
education. Every
child gets quality early
childhood education.
Every school is a community
school.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How did
it get to
that point?
PEDRO NOGUERA: Good question.
John Hope Franklin, a great
historian, was
a leader in the effort in
promoting the idea
of reparations for black folks
in Tulsa. After
he died, his students...
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: He was a
pre-Ta-Nehisi
Coates?
(LAUGHTER)
PEDRO NOGUERA: That's right.
And his students, white students
from Duke
University, took up the effort
to rebuild
Greenwood after he died. There
is a big monument
in Tulsa to John Hope Franklin
built by his
former students, most of whom
are affluent
whites in Tulsa.
So, this is an important part of
the history
too. It's, we make our greatest
advances when
it's not just African-Americans
that are pushing
the issue, when whites, when
Latinos, when
Asians, when the mosaic of
America recognizes
that we can be a better nation
if we are working
together, if we are serving each
other's interests.
And, you know, there are others
like it in
other parts of the country that
are showing
us that you don't have to wait
until we solve
the problem of poverty or
inequality. You
can do a lot in education now
that would help
to move our society forward.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But one
of the things
you have talked about is how
there are needs
beyond just the basic education,
particularly
for urban students, and I guess
you mean predominantly
African-American or children of
color.
PEDRO NOGUERA: Well, absolutely.
There are many children in this
country -- because
we have the highest child
poverty rates of
all advanced nations; 22 percent
of kids in
this country come from families
at or below
the poverty level. So, we have a
lot of kids
coming to school who are hungry,
who don't
have adequate housing, whose
have basic needs
not being met.
Schools serving those children
need other
resources. They need social
workers. They
need psychologists. They might
need a food
program. They might need health
workers on
site in order for those kids to
be able to
concentrate on education and for
their teachers
to concentrate on teaching them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Brockton, Massachusetts,
you gave an example.
PEDRO NOGUERA: What Brockton
shows us -- it's
the largest high school in the
state, 4,200
students -- that by focusing on
the student
needs, you can, even without
moving them,
create a school that's the pride
of the community.
Brockton is one of the only
urban high schools
in the state of Massachusetts
that gets a
level one rating. And that's
because over
one-third of their senior class
gets the highest
possible test score in the
state. And the
demographics of the kids who get
that score
match the demographics of the
school.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And how
did it get
that way?
PEDRO NOGUERA: They focus on
literacy.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: They
who?
PEDRO NOGUERA: The school. They
make sure
that every teacher, regardless
of the subject
they teach, is a teacher of
literacy, whether
it be science, or math, or art,
or music.
Literacy is what's promoted,
because they
understand that strong literacy
skills, reading,
writing, speaking, is the key to
a strong
education.
And they have stuck with that
for the last
15 years or more. And it shows
in the results.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: How
committed do you
think America is to maintaining
public education?
PEDRO NOGUERA: I think we're at
a crossroads.
But I try to remind people the
public education
system is the only system that
accepts all
children. If we don't educate
our children
well, we're all in trouble. The
retirees -- and
we have a growing number of
retirees in America,
most of whom are white -- are
going to be
increasingly dependent on a
younger, more
diverse work force to support
them in their
retirement.
So, even if they really care
about the kids,
if they just care about
themselves, they should
be concerned about the future of
public education.
People who are concerned about
their property
values should be concerned about
public education,
because the quality of the
schools affects
the value of your property.
So we're all in this together.
And that's
what it takes, is, we need
leadership that
gets people to see it's in our
interests as
a country to invest in our
children, to invest
in our schools. And we haven't
had that for
many years.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Except
in the places
you mentioned.
PEDRO NOGUERA: Yes. At the local
level you,
see it.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, it's
doable?
PEDRO NOGUERA: It's doable. It
is absolutely
doable.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And
you're optimistic?
PEDRO NOGUERA: Cautiously
optimistic.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Professor Noguera,
thank you for joining us.
PEDRO NOGUERA: Thank you,
Charlayne.